# GeneLab SOP for sample aliquoting, labeling and storage
Document No.:	GL-SOP-1.1  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	04_03_2020  
Last revised: 	05_05_2020  
Last revised by:	Valery Boyko  

## Purpose/Scope:
This SOP describes in detail how GeneLab SPL handles sample storage, aliquoting, labeling and the consensus acronyms we use. 

There’s 3 sections for the SOP: 

Section 1: Aliquoting and storage  
Section 2: Labeling  
Section 3: GeneLab abbreviation list

## 1. Section 1: Aliquoting and storage standardization  

  ### 1.1. Tissue Samples  
  
   *Non GeneLab gernerated:*
-	Tissue aliquots received from a PI/collaborator/biorepository shall be stored in an original tube provided if it is intact and appropriate for the designated storage temperature. 
   
   *GeneLab generated:* 
-	Genelab generated tissues shall be aliquoted and stored in Brooks Life Science 2mL, 5mL or 7.8mL tubes or an acceptable alternative. Storage temperature of all tissue samples is -80°C.  
-	If RNAlater used as a preservative, the tube shall be at least 12X bigger than the tissue mass to allow for 10X volume of preservative and headroom. After the submersion of the tissue into RNAlater, sample should be stored at 4°C for 24 hours before transfer to -80°C freezer. 

  ### 1.2. RNA/DNA samples
  
  Once RNA/DNA is extracted and quantified, it should be aliquoted as following: 
-	Aliquot “**0**” – The remaining RNA/DNA sample after all aliquots were created. Stored in 0.5mL barcoded tube without a jacket from Brooks. 
-	Aliquot “**1**” – Designated for subsequent library preparation, shall contain 1.5uG of RNA/DNA sample in 17-18uL of RNase/DNase free water. Stored in 1.5ml snap cap tube. 
-	Aliquot “**2**” – Shall have 1.5uG of RNA/DNA. Stored in 0.5mL barcoded tube without a jacket from Brooks. 
-	Aliquot “**3**” – Shall have 1.5uG of RNA/DNA. Stored in 0.5mL barcoded tube without a jacket from Brooks. 
-	Aliquot “**4**” – Shall have 1.5uG of RNA/DNA. Stored in 0.5mL barcoded tube without a jacket from Brooks. 
If total amount of RNA/DNA extracted is below 7.5uG, number of generated aliquots can be reduced. 
If DNA is not to be processed and used for library preparation in the near future, it is acceptable to generate Aliquot “0” only. 
All RNA/DNA vials should be stored at -80°C. 

Samples received from a PI/collaborator/biorepository shall be stored in an original tube provided if it is intact and appropriate for the designated storage temperature.

  ### 1.3. Sequencing libraries and library pools
  
-	Libraries should be stored in a non-stick/low DNA binding tubes or plates. 
-	Sequencing libraries shall be stored at -20C for up to 6 months after generation.  
For longer storage, it is advised to transfer libraries to -80C storage right after the sequencing is completed. If a library needs to be re-sequenced, a re-quantification and an iSeq run are required to assess the library quality. 
-	Multiplexed libraries can be stored for 6-12 weeks. 

## 2.	Section 2: Label standardization

  ### 2.1.	For all labels, only use freezer tested labels to avoid peeling. If using untested material, label the tube both in writing and with a label. 
  
  ### 2.2.	If incorporation of color coding is possible: 
   2.2.1.	Use *BLUE* label/tape for DNA
   2.2.2.	Use *YELLOW* label/tape for RNA 

  ### 2.3.	Human readable side labeling format with example following:
  
  **“Study _ Treatment/Group _ Source-id _ Sample-id _ Extract-id _ Aliquot-number"**  
Example: second aliquot of DNA sample extracted from the left eye tissue sample dissected from mouse number G5 as was part of Rodent Research 1 mission in Ground Control group will have the following printed on it’s side label:  **RR1_GC_G5_LEYE_DNA_ALQ-2**

  ### 2.4.	Human readable top labeling format with example following:
  
  “Aliquot number”  : 2  
  “Source-id”       : G5  
  “Sample-id”       : L EYE  
  “Extract-id”      : DNA  
  
-	If a microcentrifuge tube is used, write the aliquot number on the connecting part of the tube (see example image below): 
  
    

  
  
  
  
