# GeneLab SOP for QIAGEN AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini (Cat#80204) with QIAGEN RNase-Free DNase Set. (Cat# 79254) #
Document No.:	GL-SOP-3.1  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	01_07_2019  
Last revised: 	05_05_2020  
Last revised by:	Valery Boyko  

## Purpose/Scope: ##
This procedure describes the steps required to extract both RNA and DNA from mammalian tissues. 
In general, the expected RNA yield when using this procedure with the homogenization methods described in SOP#2.1 and SOP#2.2 is 0.2-0.4uG of RNA per each mG of tissue homogenized.  
The extraction kit used in this procedure is Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini. In addition, in this procedure we describe steps for depleting the isolated RNA from DNA using QIAgen RNase-Free DNase set. This step is required for RNA that will be used for sequencing. 
It is strongly advised to read the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini-Handbook in full. 

List of validated tissues: 
-	spleen
-	eye 
-	adrenal gland 
-	liver 
-	kidney
-	thymus
-	lung
-	colon
-	brain
-	white adipose
-	brown adipose
-	lymph nodes
-	reproductive tract
-	muscles (Appendix A) 
-	heart (Appendix A)
-	skin tissue (Appendix A)

**_Some buffers in this kit contain guanidine salt and are not compatible with disinfectants containing bleach._**

## Equipment and consumables: ##
1.	Eppendorf Centrifuge 5424/5424 R
2.	Bench top microcentrifuge to accommodate 1.5mL tubes (Thermo Scientific Cat#75004081 or similar) 
3.	Heat block (Eppendorf Thermomixer C Cat#2231000667 or similar) 
4.	DNA LoBind Microcentrifuge Tubes1.5mL (Thermo Scientific, Cat#13-698-791)

## Reagents: ##
1.	Allprep RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Cat#80204)
    a.	AllPrep DNA Mini Spin Columns in 2mL collection tube  
    b.	RNeasy Mini Spin Columns in 2mL collection tube  
    c.	Buffer RLT Plus  
    d.	Buffer RW1  
    e.	Buffer RPE  
    f.	RNase-Free Water  
    g.	Buffer AW1  
    h.	Buffer AW2  
    i.	Buffer EB  
2.	RNase Free DNase set (Qiagen, Cat# 79254 or Cat#79256)  
    a.	RNase-free DNase I  
    b.	RNase-free Buffer RDD  
    c.	RNase-free water   
3.	β-Mercaptoethanol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#35602BID) 
4.	Mol. grade isopropanol, 100% (Fisher Scientific, Cat#BP2618500 or similar) 
5.	Non-denatured, mol. grade ethanol, 200 proof (Fisher Scientific, Cat#BP2818100) 
6.	RNase/DNase free water (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#10977015 or similar) 
7.	RNaseZap Decontamination Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#AM9782 or similar) 

## Procedure:  ##
*Initial prep:*
-	Pre-chill microcentrifuge to 4°C.
-	Turn the heat block on and set it to 70°C and heat 2mL of RNase/DNase Free Water.
-	Prepare lysis buffer master mix by adding 1% β-ME to RLT buffer (10uL β-ME in to 1mL of RLT buffer). 
    - If using homogenization method described in SOP#2.1 prepare 600uL-800uL lysis buffer per sample.  
    - If using homogenization method described in SOP#2.2 prepare 1mL lysis buffer per sample.  
-	**Make sure 100% EtOH is added to all the Qiagen concentrated buffers RPE and RW1.**
-	Set a microcentrifuge to room temperature (25°C).
-	Prepare a working rack with pre labeled tubes as illustrated in Figure 1. 



