# GeneLab SOP for DNA Isolation Using FastDNA SPIN Kit for Soil. #
Document No.:	GL-SOP-3.4  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	04_25_2022  
Last revised: 	04_25_2022  
Last revised by:	Marie Dinh  

## Purpose/Scope ##
The procedure below describes the steps required to isolate genomic DNA from soil and other environmental samples using the FastDNA SPIN kit. 

## Reagents and consumables: ##
1. FastDNA SPIN Kit for Soil, MP Biomedicals, Cat# 116560200, 50 preps
    * Lysing Matrix E
    * Sodium Phosphate Buffer
    * MT Buffer
    * PPS Solution
    * Binding Matrix
    * SPIN Modules
    * Catch Tubes
    * Concentrated SEWS-M
    * DES
      

## Equipment: ##
1.  Analytical scale
2.  Small (2”) weigh boat (VWR, Cat#10770-454 or similar)
3.  Microspoon and spatula
4.  Eppendorf Centrifuge 5424/5424 R
5.  Heat block
6.  2mL Collection tubes
7.  15mL Tubes
8.  Table top vortex (VWR, Cat#102091-234 or similar)

## Procedure: ##
1. To prepare the sample, add up to 500 mg of soil sample, 978 μL Sodium Phosphate Buffer, and
122 μL MT Buffer to Lysing Matrix E tube.
2. Load filled Lysing Matrix E tube in Bullet Blender Gold (Refer to GL-SOP-002.1 for Tissue Homogenization using Bullet
Blender Gold) and set to 3 min at speed 12.
3. Centrifuge samples in Lysing Matrix E tubes at 14,000 x g at RT for 5-10 mins to pellet debris.
4. To precipitate proteins, transfer supernatant to a clean 2 mL microcentrifuge tube, and
add 250 μL PPS and pipet 10 times to mix.
5. Centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 5 mins to pellet precipitate.
6. To adjust binding conditions, transfer all supernatant to 15 mL tube and add 1 mL Binding Matrix Solution (mix well
by vigorous shaking or vortexing). Invert tubes for 2 mins and incubate at RT for 3 mins.
7. Discard 500 μL of supernatant (in a separate clean tube in case needed to recover more DNA).
8. To bind the DNA, transfer max 600 μL of DNA Solution to a SPIN Filter Tube.
9. Centrifuge at 14,000 x g at RT for 1 min and empty catch tube.
10. Repeat steps 8-9 if the volume of the mixture is higher than 600 μL.
11. To wash the spin filter, add 500 μL SEWS-M Solution.
12. Centrifuge at 14,000 x g at RT for 1 min and empty catch tube.
13. To dry the spin filter, centrifuge again at 14,000 x g at RT for 2 mins.
14. Air dry SPIN Filter for 5 mins at room temperature in new catch tube.
15. Pre-heat DES Elution Solution at 55 C.
16. To elute DNA, add 50 μL DES Elution Solution and place spin filter tubes on heat block at 55°C for 5 mins.
17. Centrifuge at 14,000 x g at RT for 1 min.
18. DNA in the catch tube is ready-to-use.
19. Measure DNA concentration by Qubit 1X dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Refer to SOP #4.1 DNA quantification using Qubit
Fluorimeter).
20. Measure gDNA size by TapeStation 4200 using Genomic DNA ScreenTape (Refer to SOP #4.2 QC genomic DNA).
21. Store the DNA in -80°C until use.
