# GeneLab SOP for Illumina Nextera DNA Flex Manual Library Preparation #
Document No.:	GL-SOP-5.3  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	04_07_2020  
Last revised: 	04_07_2020  
Last revised by:	Valery Boyko  

## Purpose/Scope: ##
This procedure follows the Illumina Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Guide, Doc# 1000000025416 v07. 
It is strongly advised to read the guide in full before using this SOP. 

## Reagents: ##
1.	Illumina Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Kit (Illumina, Cat#20018705)
2.	IDT for Illumina Nextera DNA Unique Dual Indexes set A-D (Illumina,Cat#20027213-6)
3.	Ethanol 200 proof (absolute) for molecular biology (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#E7023 or similar)
4.	Nuclease-free Water 

## Equipment ##
1.	Magnetic stand-96 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#AM10027) 
2.	Microplate centrifuge
3.	Microplate vortex
4.	Micro-centrifuge
5.	Vortex
6.	Bio-Rad C-1000 Touch thermal cycler

## General Instructions: ##
1.	Recommended input amount of DNA is 500nG for large genome organisms(murine) and 200-300ng for small genome organisms (microbial). 
2.	The tagmentation protocol won’t normalize final library yield for samples prepped from < 100nG of DNA.
3.	Make sure to record the sample information with the Index ID that will be added to each sample. 
4.	Always seal plates with adhesive seal before vortexing, spinning or PCR steps.
5.	Only stop during safe stopping points of the procedure.
6.	If not using the whole kit, label the used tubes on top of the lid with the abbreviation of the consumable name. 
7.	If preparing >8 libraries use a multichannel to dispense reagents to save time:  
  a.	Aliquot the reagent into 8-tube strip or a reagent plate.  
  b.	Transfer reagent from strip/reagent plate on to the reaction plate.  
  c.	Dispose of the 8-tube strips when done. If using a reagent plate, cross out the used reagent title.  
8.	Bead handling:  
  a.	Always store beads upright in the refrigerator.  
  b.	Vortex bead stock thoroughly until all beads are resuspended.  
  c.	Avoid disturbing bead pellet.  
  d.	Never store beads at below 2°C.
9.	Create the following PCR programs 

a.	Program 1: TAG 
•	Preheat lid to 100°C
•	Set reaction volume to 50uL
•	55°C for 15min
•	Hold at 10°C
b.	Program 2: PTC 
•	Preheat lid to 100°C
•	Set reaction volume to 60uL
•	37°C for 15min
•	Hold at 10°C
c.	Program 3: BLT PCR
•	Preheat lid to 100°C
•	68°C for 3min
•	98v for 3min
•	5 cycles of
1.	98°C for 45sec
2.	62°C for 30sec
3.	68°C for 2min
•	68°C for 1min
•	Hold at 10°C

*Step 1: Tagment Genomic DNA*
###Consumables###
•	Bead-Linked Transposome (**BLT, yellow cap**)
•	Tagmentation Buffer 1 (**BT1**) 
•	Nuclease-free water

### Preparation ###
1.	Prepare the following consumables:  
  a.	BLT – take out of 4°C storage and bring to room temperature. Vortex to mix and do not centrifuge before pipetting.  
  b.	TB1 – take out of -20°C storage and bring to room temperature. Vortex to mix.  

### Protocol ###


