# GeneLab SOP for manual Illumina TruSeq Total RNA (Ribo Gold) library Clean-Up from Adapter Dimers #
Document No.:	GL-SOP-6.6  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	02_27_2019  
Last revised: 	02_27_2019  
Last revised by:	Valery Boyko  

## Purpose/Scope: ##
Protocol written for 48 samples

This SOP describes the steps used by NASA GeneLab for manually cleaning Illumina TruSeq Total RNA libraries of adapter dimers.

## Reagents: ##
1.	RSB (Resuspension buffer) from Illumina TruSeq total RNA (Ribo Gold)
2.	3x 96-well half skirted plates
3.	AMPure XP reagent (Beckman Coulter cat#A63882/A638880/A63881)
4.	Multi-channel pipettes 
5.	Rod magnetic stand 
6.	Liquid reservoirs 

## Procedure: ##
**_Make sure the AMPure beads and RSB buffer were equilibrated to room temperature for 30min prior beginning the procedure._**

1.	Thaw the original library plate(20uL) and the QC sister plate(10uL).
2.	Using a multi-channel pipette, combine the volume of the 2 plates. 
3.	Choose 5 wells and measure combined volume to make sure it is 30uL. If volume differs, bring all wells to a final volume of 50uL by addition of appropriate volume of RSB. If volume is 30uL, proceed to step 4.
4.	Using a multi-channel pipette, add 20uL of RSB.
5.	Using a multi-channel pipette and a reservoir, add 40uL of AMPure beads in to all library wells. (0.8X SPRI clean up). Seal the plate.
6.	Vortex using the heat-block or a plate vortexer at 1800 RPM for 2 minutes.
7.	Incubate at room temperature for 20 minutes (Precise time).
8.	Quick spin the plate and carefully open the plate seal.
9.	Place plate on a rod magnetic stand and incubate for 5 minutes.
10.	Without removing plate from magnetic stand, wash two times as follows:  
  a.	Using a multi-channel pipette, add 200uL of fresh (<24HR old) EtOH to each well.  
  b.	Incubate for 30 seconds.  
  c.	Remove and discard all supernatant from each well.  
11.	Use a 20uL multi-channel pipette to remove residual EtOH from each well.
12.	Air-dry on the magnetic stand for 7-10min. Check for “coffee bean appearance”, avoid over drying. 
13.	Remove plate from the magnetic stand. 
14.	Using a multi-channel pipette and a reservoir, add 50uL of RSB in to each well, seal the plate. 
15.	Vortex using the heat-block or a plate vortexer at 1800 RPM for 2 minutes.
16.	Incubate at room temperature for 2 minutes.
17.	Quick spin the plate and carefully open the plate seal.
18.	Place the plate on a magnetic stand for 5 minutes. 
19.	Transfer 50uL of supernatant into clean wells. (same plate can be used). 
20.	Repeat steps 5-13 one more time.
21.	Using a multi-channel pipette and a reservoir, add 30uL of RSB in to each well, seal the plate. 
22.	Vortex using the heat-block or a plate vortexer at 1800 RPM for 2 minutes.
23.	Incubate at room temperature for 5 minutes.
24.	Quick spin the plate and carefully open the plate seal.
25.	Place the plate on a magnetic stand for 5-10 minutes. 
26.	Transfer 30uL of supernatant in a new plate. 
27.	Make a sister QC plate by transferring 10uL of the libraries in to a new plate. 

