# GeneLab SOP for Generating iSeq QC complete report from HTStream on MMOC.  Scripts and instructions written by Amanda Saravia-Butler. #
Document No.:	GL-SOP-8.1  
Version:	1.0  
Created:	04_10_2020  
Last revised: 	04_10_2020  
Last revised by:	Marie Dinh  

## Purpose/Scope: ##

More info about genomic data pre-processing tool, developed by UC Davis’ Matt Settles can be found here: https://github.com/ibest/HTStream.   
There are three components used in the scripts for the complete report: hts_SeqScreener, hts_Stats and hts_SuperDeduper.   
rRNA fasta files retrieved from NCBI were used for human, mouse and bacterial rRNA calculations.  
Instructions below were written for paired-end reads with UMI adapters.  The instructions can be applied for single-end read using appropriate script in step 37.  
For no UMI adapters, skip steps 12-18.  

**Instructions to generate an iSEQ QC report for paired-end reads with HTStream on MMOC:**
* Note: all screen shots of my terminal are colored – yours will be a white background with black text (unless you change the settings for your terminal).

1.	Open a terminal window and log into MMOC using the following command:  
  $ ssh username@gene-hn.amn.nasa.gov  
  Type in your password when you’re prompted for it, then press Enter  

2.	Change into the SPL_iSeq directory using the following command:  
  $ cd /netapp/disk1/SPL_iSeq  

3.	In the folder ‘SPL_iSeq’ make a new folder for the iSEQ run you want to analyze by typing the command below.  
  $ mkdir RunName_iSeq_date_initals  

Note: The title of the folder cannot have any spaces or weird characters, see example below.  
For example: RR6_iSeq_20190617_ASB  

4.	Change into the directory you made in step 3 using the following command:  
  $ cd /netapp/disk1/SPL_iSeq/RR6_iSeq_20190617_ASB  

5.	Once in that directory, type the following command to view the direct path to that directory on MMOC:  
  $ pwd  
  In this example, you should see the following appear:  
  /netapp/disk1/SPL_iSeq/RR6_iSeq_20190617_ASB  

6.	Copy the entire directory that’s outputted from the iSeq run onto the Desktop of your computer.

7.	Open a new terminal window (note: you will not be logged into MMOC in this window).

8.	Copy the iSeq directory from your Desktop into the directory you made in step 3 on MMOC by typing the following command in the terminal window you opened in step 7.  
  $ scp -r ~/Desktop/iSeq_output_directory username@gene-hn.amn.nasa.gov:/path/to/directory/made/on/MMOC/in/step/3  
  Type in your MMOC password when you’re prompted for it, then press Enter
  Example:    
  $ scp -r ~/Desktop/20190617_FS10000323_13_BPC29610-1014 asaravia@gene-hn.amn.nasa.gov:/netapp/disk1/SPL_iSeq/RR6_iSeq_20190617_ASB  

  Note: This will take ~5-10 minutes (you’ll see your command prompt return when it’s done).  
9.	Return to the directory on MMOC you made in step 3 in the terminal window that’s logged into MMOC.

10.	Repeat step 5 to make sure you’re in the directory you made in step 3, then type the following command to check that the directory copied in step 8 is now in the directory on MMOC you made in step 3.  
  $ ls  
  In this example, you should see the following:  
  20190617_FS10000323_13_BPC29610-1014  

11.	While in the directory you made in step 3, make a directory for the bcl2fastq output using the following command:  
  $ mkdir out-name_of_iSeq_output_directory  
  Example:  
  $ mkdir out-20190617_FS10000323_13_BPC29610-1014  
  
  ***Steps 12 – 18 are only for iSeq runs that contain samples with UMIs***  
  ***If the iSeq run does NOT contain samples with UMIs, jump to step 19***

12.	We’ll have to change some info in the files in the iSeq output directory, so change into that directory by typing the following command:  
  $ cd name_of_iSeq_output_directory  
  Example:  
  $ cd 20190617_FS10000323_13_BPC29610-1014  

13.	Make copies of the files we will change to preserve the original file by typing the following commands:
  $ cp SampleSheet.csv SampleSheet_original.csv  
  $ cp RunInfo.xml RunInfo_original.xml  

14.	Open the SampleSheet.csv file using nano by typing the following command:
  $ nano SampleSheet.csv  
  You’ll see a window open that looks as follows:  



